[Jekyll] Spec Insert Plugin (#8692)
opensearch-project/documentation-website: DEVELOPER_GUIDE.md

> # Developer Guide

Reviewer: ```suggestion
# Developer guide
```

 - [Introduction](#introduction)
 - [Starting the Jekyll server locally](#starting-the-jekyll-server-locally)
 - [Using spec-insert Jekyll plugin](#using-spec-insert-jekyll-plugin)
   - [Insert Query Parameters](#insert-query-parameters)
   - [Insert Path Parameters](#insert-path-parameters)
   - [Insert Paths and HTTP Methods](#insert-paths-and-http-methods)
   - [Ignored files and folders](#ignored-files-and-folders)
   - [CI/CD](#cicd)

## Introduction
The `.md` documents in this repository are rendered into HTML pages using [Jekyll](https://jekyllrb.com/). These HTML pages are hosted on [opensearch.org](https://opensearch.org/docs/latest/).

## Starting the Jekyll server locally
You can run the Jekyll server locally to view the rendered HTML pages after making changes to the markdown files:
- Install [Ruby](https://www.ruby-lang.org/en/documentation/installation/) 3.1.0 or later for your operating system.
- Install the required gems by running `bundle install`.
- Run `bundle exec jekyll serve` to start the Jekyll server locally. (This can take several minutes to be ready.)
- Open your browser and navigate to `http://localhost:4000` to view the rendered HTML pages.

> ## Using spec-insert Jekyll plugin

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Using the `spec-insert` Jekyll plugin
```

> The `spec-insert` Jekyll plugin is used to insert API components into the markdown files. The plugin downloads the latest OpenSearch Specification and renders the API components from the spec. This aims to reduce the manual effort required to keep the documentation up-to-date.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The `spec-insert` Jekyll plugin is used to insert API components into the markdown files. The plugin downloads the [latest OpenSearch Specification](https://github.com/opensearch-project/opensearch-api-specification) and renders the API components from the spec. This aims to reduce the manual effort required to keep the documentation up-to-date.
```

Everything between the `spec_insert_start` and `spec_insert_end` tags will be overwritten.

<!-- spec_insert_end -->
```

Then run the follow Jekyll command to render the API components:
```shell
bundle exec jekyll spec-insert
```

If you are working on multiple markdown files and do not want to keep running the `jekyll spec-insert` command, you can add the `--watch` (or `-W`) flag to the command to watch for changes in the markdown files and automatically render the API components:
```shell
bundle exec jekyll spec-insert --watch
```

Note that depending on the text editor you are using to edit the markdown, you may need to manually reload the file from disk to see the changes applied by the plugin if the editor does not automatically reload the file periodically.

The plugin will pull the newest OpenSearch Spec from its [repository](https://github.com/opensearch-project/opensearch-api-specification) if the spec file does not exist locally or if it is older than 24 hours. To tell the plugin to always pull the newest spec, you can add the `--refresh-spec` (or `-R`) flag to the command:

```shell
bundle exec jekyll spec-insert --refresh-spec
```

> ### Insert query parameters

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### Inserting query parameters
```

... to keep things consistent.

To insert query parameters table of the `cat.indices` API, use the following snippet:
```markdown
<!-- spec_insert_start
api: cat.indices
component: query_parameters
-->
<!-- spec_insert_end -->
```

- This will insert the query parameters of the `cat.indices` API into the markdown file 3 default columns: `Parameter`, `Type`, and `Description`. There are 5 columns that can be inserted: `Parameter`, `Type`, `Description`, `Required`, and `Default`. When `Required`/`Default` is not chosen, the info will be written in the `Description` column.
- This component accepts `include_global` (Boolean, default to `false`) argument to include global query parameters in the table.
- This component accepts `include_deprecated` (Boolean, default to `true`) argument to include deprecated parameters in the table.
- This component accepts `pretty` (Boolean, default to `false`) argument to render the table in the pretty format instead of the compact format.

```markdown
<!-- spec_insert_start
api: cat.indices
component: query_parameters
include_global: true
include_deprecated: false
pretty: true
-->
<!-- spec_insert_end -->
```

> ### Insert path parameters

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### Inserting path parameters
```

To insert path parameters table of the `indices.create` API, use the following snippet:
```markdown
<!-- spec_insert_start
api: indices.create
component: path_parameters
-->
<!-- spec_insert_end -->
```

This table behaves the same as the query parameters table except that it does not accept the `include_global` argument.

> ### Insert paths and HTTP methods

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### Inserting paths and HTTP methods
```

To insert paths and HTTP methods of the `search` API, use the following snippet:
```markdown
<!-- spec_insert_start
api: search
component: paths_and_http_methods
-->
<!-- spec_insert_end -->
```

> ### Ignored files and folders

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### Ignoring files and folders
```

# Developer guide
 - [Introduction](#introduction)
 - [Starting the Jekyll server locally](#starting-the-jekyll-server-locally)

>  - [Using spec-insert Jekyll plugin](#using-spec-insert-jekyll-plugin)

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
 - [Using the spec-insert Jekyll plugin](#using-spec-insert-jekyll-plugin)
```

>    - [Insert Query Parameters](#insert-query-parameters)

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
   - [Inserting query parameters](#insert-query-parameters)
```

>    - [Insert Path Parameters](#insert-path-parameters)

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
   - [Inserting path parameters](#insert-path-parameters)
```

>    - [Insert Paths and HTTP Methods](#insert-paths-and-http-methods)

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
   - [Inserting paths and HTTP methods](#insert-paths-and-http-methods)
```

>    - [Ignored files and folders](#ignored-files-and-folders)

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
   - [Ignoring files and folders](#ignored-files-and-folders)
```

   - [CI/CD](#cicd)

## Introduction

The `.md` documents in this repository are rendered into HTML pages using [Jekyll](https://jekyllrb.com/). These HTML pages are hosted on [opensearch.org](https://opensearch.org/docs/latest/).

## Starting the Jekyll server locally
You can run the Jekyll server locally to view the rendered HTML pages using the following steps:

1. Install [Ruby](https://www.ruby-lang.org/en/documentation/installation/) 3.1.0 or later for your operating system.
2. Install the required gems by running `bundle install`.

> 3. Run `bundle exec jekyll serve` to start the Jekyll server locally. (This can take several minutes to be ready.)

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
3. Run `bundle exec jekyll serve` to start the Jekyll server locally (this can take several minutes to complete).
```

4. Open your browser and navigate to `http://localhost:4000` to view the rendered HTML pages.

## Using the `spec-insert` Jekyll plugin

> The `spec-insert` Jekyll plugin is used to insert API components into the markdown files. The plugin downloads the [latest OpenSearch Specification](https://github.com/opensearch-project/opensearch-api-specification) and renders the API components from the spec. This aims to reduce the manual effort required to keep the documentation up-to-date.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The `spec-insert` Jekyll plugin is used to insert API components into Markdown files. The plugin downloads the [latest OpenSearch specification](https://github.com/opensearch-project/opensearch-api-specification) and renders the API components from the spec. This aims to reduce the manual effort required to keep the documentation up to date.
```

To use this plugin, make sure that you have installed Ruby 3.1.0 or later and the required gems by running `bundle install`.

> Edit your markdown file and insert the following snippet where you want an API component to be rendered:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Edit your Markdown file and insert the following snippet where you want render an API component:
```

```markdown
<!-- spec_insert_start 
api: <API_NAME>
component: <COMPONENT_NAME>
other_param: <OTHER_PARAM>
-->

This is where the API component will be inserted.
Everything between the `spec_insert_start` and `spec_insert_end` tags will be overwritten.

<!-- spec_insert_end -->
```

> Then run the follow Jekyll command to render the API components:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Then run the following Jekyll command to render the API components:
```

```shell
bundle exec jekyll spec-insert
```

> If you are working on multiple markdown files and do not want to keep running the `jekyll spec-insert` command, you can add the `--watch` (or `-W`) flag to the command to watch for changes in the markdown files and automatically render the API components:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
If you are working on multiple Markdown files and do not want to keep running the `jekyll spec-insert` command, you can add the `--watch` (or `-W`) flag to the command to watch for changes in the Markdown files and automatically render the API components:
```

```shell
bundle exec jekyll spec-insert --watch
```

> Depending on the text editor you are using to edit the markdown, you may need to manually reload the file from disk to see the changes applied by the plugin if the editor does not automatically reload the file periodically.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Depending on the text editor you are using, you may need to manually reload the file from disk to see the changes applied by the plugin if the editor does not automatically reload the file periodically.
```

The plugin will pull the newest OpenSearch API spec from its [repository](https://github.com/opensearch-project/opensearch-api-specification) if the spec file does not exist locally or if it is older than 24 hours. To tell the plugin to always pull the newest spec, you can add the `--refresh-spec` (or `-R`) flag to the command:

```shell
bundle exec jekyll spec-insert --refresh-spec
```

### Inserting query parameters

> To insert query parameters table of the, use the following snippet:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
To insert query parameters, use the following snippet:
```

> 

Reviewer 3: Above: "To insert the API query parameters table"?

```markdown
<!-- spec_insert_start
api: cat.indices
component: query_parameters
-->
<!-- spec_insert_end -->
```

> This will insert the query parameters of the `cat.indices` API into the `.md` file with three default columns: `Parameter`, `Type`, and `Description`. There are 5 columns that can be inserted: `Parameter`, `Type`, `Description`, `Required`, and `Default`. When `Required`/`Default` is not chosen, the info will be written in the `Description` column.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
This will insert the query parameters of the `cat.indices` API into the `.md` file with three default columns: `Parameter`, `Type`, and `Description`. There are five columns that can be inserted: `Parameter`, `Type`, `Description`, `Required`, and `Default`. When `Required`/`Default` is not chosen, the information will be written in the `Description` column.
```

You can customize the query parameters table with the following columns:

- `Parameter`
- `Type`
- `Description`
- `Required` 
- `Default`

 You can also customize this component with the following settings:
 

> - `include_global` (Boolean, default to `false`): Includes global query parameters in the table.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `include_global` (Boolean; default is `false`): Includes global query parameters in the table.
```

> - `include_deprecated` (Boolean, default to `true`): Includes deprecated parameters in the table.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `include_deprecated` (Boolean; default is `true`): Includes deprecated parameters in the table.
```

> - `pretty` (Boolean, default to `false`): Renders the table in the pretty format instead of the compact format.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `pretty` (Boolean; default is `false`): Renders the table in the pretty format instead of the compact format.
```

> You can customize the query parameters table with the following columns:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The following snippet inserts the specified columns into the query parameters table:
```

```markdown
<!-- spec_insert_start
api: cat.indices
component: query_parameters
include_global: true
include_deprecated: false
pretty: true
-->
<!-- spec_insert_end -->
```

### Inserting path parameters

> To insert path parameters table of the `indices.create` API, use the following snippet:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
To insert the `indices.create` API path parameters table, use the following snippet:
```

```markdown
<!-- spec_insert_start
api: indices.create
component: path_parameters
-->
<!-- spec_insert_end -->
```

> This table behaves the same as the query parameters table except that it does not accept the `include_global` argument.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
This table behaves identically to the query parameters table except that it does not accept the `include_global` argument.
```

### Inserting paths and HTTP methods

> To insert paths and HTTP methods of the `search` API, use the following snippet:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
To insert paths and HTTP methods for the `search` API, use the following snippet:
```

```markdown
<!-- spec_insert_start
api: search
component: paths_and_http_methods
-->
<!-- spec_insert_end -->
```

### Ignoring files and folders

The `spec-insert` plugin ignores all files and folders listed in the [./_config.yml#exclude](./_config.yml) list, which is also the list of files and folders that Jekyll ignores.

### CI/CD

> 

Reviewer 3: Below: Is the link complete?

Reviewer: This link will work once we have this merged in.

> The `spec-insert` plugin is run as part of the CI/CD pipeline to ensure that the API components are up-to-date in the documentation. This is done through the [update-api-components.yml](.github/workflows/update-api-components.yml) GitHub Action workflow that creates a pull request with the updated API components every Sunday.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The `spec-insert` plugin is run as part of the CI/CD pipeline to ensure that the API components are up to date in the documentation. This is performed through the [update-api-components.yml](.github/workflows/update-api-components.yml) GitHub Actions workflow, which creates a pull request containing the updated API components every Sunday.
```
